The President:
One month ago this week, BP's Deepwater Horizon drilling rig
exploded off Louisiana's coast,
killing 11 people and rupturing
an underwater pipe.
The resulting oil spill has not
only dealt an economic blow to
Americans across the Gulf
Coast, it also represents an
environmental disaster.
In response, we're drawing on
America's best minds and using
the world's best technology
to stop the leak.
We've deployed over 1,100
vessels, about 24,000 personnel,
and more than 2 million total
feet of boom to help contain it.
And we're doing all we can to
assist struggling fishermen,
and the small businesses and
communities that depend on them.
Folks on the Gulf Coast
-- and across America --
are rightly demanding swift
action to clean up BP's mess and
end this ordeal.
But they're also demanding to
know how this happened in the
first place, and how we can make
sure it never happens again.
That's what I'd like to spend
a few minutes talking with you about.
First and foremost, what led to
this disaster was a breakdown of
responsibility on the part
of BP and perhaps others,
including Transocean
and Halliburton.
And we will continue to hold the
relevant companies accountable
not only for being forthcoming
and transparent about the facts
surrounding the leak,
but for shutting it down,
repairing the damage it does,
and repaying Americans who've
suffered a financial loss.
But even as we continue
to hold BP accountable,
we also need to hold
Washington accountable.
Now, this catastrophe is
unprecedented in its nature,
and it presents a host of new
challenges we're working to address.
But the question is what lessons
we can learn from this disaster
to make sure it
never happens again.
If the laws on our books are
inadequate to prevent such an
oil spill, or if we didn't enforce those laws --
I want to know it.
I want to know what worked and
what didn't work in our response
to the disaster, and where
oversight of the oil and gas
industry broke down.
We know, for example, that a
cozy relationship between oil
and gas companies and the agencies that regulate them has
long been a source of concern.
Secretary of the Interior Ken
Salazar has taken steps to
address this problem; steps that
build on reforms he has been
implementing since
he took office.
But we need to do a lot more to
protect the health and safety of
our people; to safeguard the
quality of our air and water;
and to preserve the natural
beauty and bounty of America.
In recent weeks, we've taken a
number of immediate measures to
prevent another spill.
We've ordered inspections of all
deepwater operations in the Gulf
of Mexico.
We've announced that no permits
for drilling new wells will go
forward until the 30-day safety
and environmental review I
requested is complete.
And I've called on Congress to
pass a bill that would provide
critical funds and tools to
respond to this spill and better
prepare us to confront
any future spills.
But we also need to take a
comprehensive look at how the
oil and gas industry operates
and how we regulate them.
That's why, on Friday, I signed
an executive order establishing
the National Commission on the
BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill
and Offshore Drilling.
While there are a number
of ongoing investigations,
including an independent review
by the National Academy of
Engineering, the purpose of this
Commission is to consider both
the root causes of the disaster
and offer options on what safety
and environmental precautions
we need to take to prevent a
similar disaster
from happening again.
This Commission, I'd note, is
similar to one proposed by
Congresswoman Capps
and Senator Whitehouse.
And I've asked Democrat
Bob Graham and Republican
Bill Reilly to co-chair
this Commission.
Bob served two terms
as Florida's governor,
and represented Florida as a
United States Senator for almost
two decades.
During that time, he earned a
reputation as a champion of the
environment, leading the
most extensive environmental
protection effort in
the state's history.
Bill Reilly is chairman emeritus
of the board of the World
Wildlife Fund, and he is also
deeply knowledgeable about the
oil and gas industry.
During the presidency
of George H.W. Bush,
Bill was Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency,
and his tenure encompassed
the Exxon Valdez disaster.
I can't think of two people who
will bring greater experience or
better judgment to
the task at hand.
In the days to come, I'll
appoint 5 other distinguished
Americans --
including scientists,
engineers, and
environmental advocates --
to join them on the Commission.
And I'm directing them to
report back in 6 months with
recommendations on
how we can prevent --
and mitigate the impact of -- any future spills that result
from offshore drilling.
One of the reasons I ran for
President was to put America on
the path to energy independence,
and I have not wavered from that commitment.
To achieve that goal, we must
pursue clean energy and energy
efficiency, and we've taken
significant steps to do so.
And we must also pursue domestic
sources of oil and gas.
Because it represents 30%
of our oil production,
the Gulf of Mexico can play an
important part in securing our
energy future.
But we can only pursue offshore
oil drilling if we have
assurances that a disaster like
the BP oil spill will not happen again.
This Commission will, I hope,
help provide those assurances so
we can continue to seek a secure
energy future for the United
States of America.
Thanks so much.